Incredible!
That’s the only way to describe it.
The word had gone out that the Jews
who had been captives
in Babylon were free to leave
and to return to their homeland, Israel.
Now, you all know why that was incredible:
because Babylon never released its captives.
But Babylon had been overthrown,
and the new administration had said
that the Jews were free to go.
Only Jehovah could have been
responsible for that.
So every family head had a decision to make:
to leave Babylon or to stay behind.
Now, you might say:
“There was no decision to make at all.
That’s not a hard decision.”
But wait.
Hold it.
Most of the Jews had been born in Babylon.
And most of their parents
had been born in Babylon.
It was the only home they knew.
Their roots were there.
And according to certain records,
some of them had gotten prosperous.
Some of them had gotten wealthy.
There are records of Jews
buying and selling precious gems
and other luxury items.
So one says: “I can’t leave Babylon.
“My business partner is a Babylonian,
“and the business is doing really well,
and there would be no market
for the products we sell in Israel.”
Another would say:
“My son married a Babylonian woman,
“and they just had a baby,
“our first grandchild.
“He’s so cute.
I can’t leave now.”
So on the one hand,
you have these material benefits
from remaining in Babylon.
But on the other hand,
the ability of the Jews
to worship Jehovah freely
was severely limited.
It’s said that there were 50 pagan temples
in the capital alone.
But there was no temple of Jehovah there.
And the Levites weren’t able to follow
the Law of Moses properly.
They could only do so to a limited degree.
So you had material advantages to staying,
but the spiritual blessings
that awaited those who chose to leave
were going to be immense.
And for spiritually-minded Jews,
it was no contest
because they wanted to leave Babylon
and reestablish pure worship
in the Promised Land in Israel.
And so if they were physically able to do so,
they would leave Babylon
and travel to Jerusalem,
a city most of them had never seen,
a city in ruins.
But Jehovah promised to make
the trip from Babylon to Jerusalem
as easy as possible.
And to confirm that
and to get a little picture in our minds,
we’re going to read a series
of four different scriptures.
And each scripture is going to add
a little detail to what Jehovah had in mind.
So the first one
is found at Isaiah chapter 40,
verses 3 and 4.
And I’ll wait a moment because it’d be good
if we could read this together.
This is Isaiah chapter 40,
the well-known words of verses 3, 4:
“A voice of one
calling out in the wilderness:
“‘Clear up the way of Jehovah!
“‘Make a straight highway through the desert
“‘[a straight highway through the desert]
for our God.
“‘Let every valley be raised up,
“‘and every mountain and hill be made low.
“‘The rough ground must become level,
and the rugged ground, a valley plain.’”
You know, every time I read these words,
I think of Brother Carey Barber.
He must have loved this passage
because very often in his prayers
he would quote this passage word for word
—good memories of Brother Barber.
But now, it talks about making
“a straight highway through the desert.”
If some of you have gone
to the Ramapo project,
you know what site work is all about.
How would you like to have
the Construction Committee in Ramapo
take that job on?
“Make a straight highway through the desert.
“When you come to a mountain,
you’ve got to level it.
When you come to a valley,
you’ve got to bring it up.”
That would be quite a job.
I think they have enough on their plate.
They don’t need to worry
about this kind of site work.
But this was going to be a big job.
But in the end, it would be a lot easier
to travel on a straight highway
than to go up and down
a mountain or down a valley.
And it would be a lot faster too.
So we know that there
was going to be a straight highway
between Babylon and Jerusalem.
What else can we learn?
Isaiah 57,
Isaiah 57:14
—verse 14 says: “It will be said:
“‘Build up, build up a road!
“‘Prepare the way!
“‘[and here it comes]
Remove any obstacle
from the way of my people.’”
So now we have two details:
It’s  going to be a straight highway
through the desert,
and all of the obstacles
are going to be cleared away.
But now, most highways have a name.
Some of them are named after famous people;
others have a number.
Does this special highway have a name?
It does.
And we go to Isaiah 35:8, 9
to find that name.
I’m giving you a real workout this morning,
but we have to do this
to put it all together.
Isaiah 35:8, 9:
“And a highway will be there, yes,
“a way called [here it comes]
“the Way of Holiness.
“The unclean one will not travel on it.
“It is reserved for the one
walking on the way;
“no one foolish will stray onto it.
“No lion will be there,
“and no vicious wild beasts will come on it.
“They will not be found there.
Only the repurchased ones will walk there.”
So, what’s the name?
What’s the special name of this highway?
“The Way of Holiness.”
Isn’t that a nice name for a highway?
Rattlesnakes, bears,
foxes, and cougars are not allowed.
I don’t care how cute you think they are.
They’re not allowed on this special highway.
Now,
what else can we learn
about this special highway?
Today, you don’t know who is traveling
in the car next to yours.
It could be somebody
who has no business driving a car.
The driver could be drunk.
He could be on drugs.
But on this highway,
the unclean one is not permitted.
Those who would break God’s laws
are not permitted to travel on that highway.
Well, we’re talking about the highway
between Babylon and Jerusalem.
And no doubt unclean ones among the Jews
wouldn’t be interested
in going back to Israel anyway.
They were probably very much at home
with the idolatry of Babylon.
Remember, their forefathers
were no strangers to idolatry.
So only those who were
clean and acceptable in Jehovah’s eyes
were welcome to travel
from Babylon back to Jerusalem.
Now, let’s be clear.
We don’t know whether
there was any literal roadwork
done on the road between Babylon and Israel.
It may be all figurative, but there
could have been some roadwork done.
Notice what Jehovah told the Jews to do
in Jeremiah 31:21.
And you would ask,
‘Why would Jehovah
say all of these things
if it was all to be ignored literally?’
At Jeremiah 31:21,
he says:
“Set up road markers for yourself,
“and put up signposts.
“Pay attention to the highway,
the way that you have to go.
“Return, O virgin of Israel,
return to these cities of yours.”
So no doubt the first groups to use the road
would remove obstacles
and level things out the best they could
so that those who followed
would have an easier journey.
So, now, what have we learned?
What have we gleaned
from this series of scriptures?
First, there was a highway,
a highway through the desert.
We’ve also learned
that it was to be cleared of obstacles.
It has a special name,
“the Way of Holiness.”
And there were to be signposts
so that those who traveled the road
wouldn’t get lost
and maybe stray onto some other road.
Now, what was the goal?
Why did Jehovah want this road
to be prepared so nicely?
To make it as easy as possible
for the Jews to leave Babylon
and go back to Israel
and reestablish pure worship.
Did it work?
Tens of thousands of men, women,
and children responded
to the call (the invitation)
and with Jehovah’s help,
they arrived safely at their destination.
Well, you might be thinking:
‘This is all very nice.
‘But what does it have to do with me?
What does it have to do with us today?’
Plenty.
Because today, not tens of thousands
but millions of men, women, and children
are responding to the command,
the urgent command to “get out of her,”
get out of “Babylon the Great.”
And the situation
is different from the situation
of the Jews in ancient times
because they had a choice.
They could remain
in Babylon and still serve Jehovah.
But people today have no choice.
They must leave Babylon the Great.
Their life depends on it.
Now, without looking for a type and antitype,
trying to fit everything
in very neatly in this arrangement,
we can say that there are some similarities
between what happened
to the Jews in ancient times
and what is happening today,
because in a sense, when you start
to study the Bible with someone,
you are pointing him
in the direction of “the Way of Holiness.”
Now, some start studying,
and they start traveling on the road,
and then they turn back.
But others keep going,
and they become dedicated,
baptized disciples of Christ.
Some travel in the fast lane.
They make rapid progress.
Others sort of take the far right lane,
and they poke along,
but they keep making progress.
And as long as they keep making progress,
we’ll study with them.
Some break down,
and that calls for roadside assistance.
But it’s easier to travel
on “the Way of Holiness” today
than it ever has been.
And, friends,
this is partly due to the spiritual site work
that was started centuries ago.
I’m going to repeat that.
It is easier to travel
‘the highway of holiness’ today
because of the spiritual site work
that was started hundreds of years ago,
long before Babylon the Great fell,
long before the road
was opened for travelers.
Now, picture this: It’s the 16th century.
With shovel in hand,
you are about to start site work
on “the Way of Holiness.”
There is a mountain ahead of you
—a mountain of ignorance.
And you realize that if you
are going to start to level that mountain,
the first thing you’re
going to have to do is get the Bible
into the hands of the people.
For years, the Bible was just only in Latin,
and only mostly educated people
could read it.
And even some of the clergy
only knew enough Latin
to conduct church services;
but otherwise, they couldn’t understand it.
Well, if you’ve been to our beautiful museum
(some of you have taken a tour recently),
you know that translators
in many countries risked their freedom
and even their lives to put the Bible
into the language of the common people.
And then printers
produced those translations.
And some of them used an assumed name,
because if they got caught printing a Bible,
they could be arrested and even worse.
So the mountain had to be leveled
a shovelful at a time
—one Bible at a time—
to reduce that mountain
on “the Way of Holiness.”
To get the Bible
into the hands of the people,
William Tyndale
arranged to have thousands of copies
of his translation smuggled into England
in bales of cotton and other goods.
This was dangerous.
Tyndale’s translation was banned in England,
and if you merely possessed
a copy of the Bible,
that could bring you a stint
in the Tower of London or worse.
But despite desperate attempts
to stop work on “the Way of Holiness,”
more copies of Tyndale’s Bible were printed
than the clergy could ever destroy.
By the way, you’d be interested
in a comment that Tyndale made
in his comments on the book of Genesis
(the 1530 translation
of the book of Genesis).
He wrote: “Jehovah is God’s name.
“Neither is any creature so called.
“As oft as thou
seist LORD in capital letters,
it is in Hebrew Jehovah.”
Early on, the name Jehovah
was given some recognition.
Well, with the Bible becoming
more available to the people,
you’d expect that students of the Bible
would want to share
their research with others.
And that was the case.
In the years leading up to 1919
when Babylon the Great fell,
more roadwork was done.
And so we had men
who shared the fruitage of their research
in tracts, in books
—publications of all kinds—
because they wanted the people to know.
They wanted to reduce
that mountain of ignorance.
For example,
about 1835,
a Bible student by the name of Henry Grew
wrote a pamphlet
on the immortality of the soul.
And in that pamphlet,
Grew explained from the Bible
that immortality
is a reward for faithfulness.
We’re not born with it.
Now, he published the tract anonymously
because he knew there would be trouble.
And later on,
there was trouble for Henry Grew.
Well, he publishes a tract.
But two years later,
another Bible student, George Storrs,
is riding in a train,
and he looks down and he sees a tract there,
and it’s Henry Grew’s tract
on the immortality of the soul.
He reads it.
And he becomes convinced that man
doesn’t have an immortal soul.
So, what does he do?
He picks up a shovel,
and he starts working on the road,
the road “the Way of Holiness.”
In 1842, he gave a series of lectures
on the intriguing theme
“Are the Wicked Immortal?”
And he later published those lectures.
Do you know how many copies were produced?
Two hundred thousand copies
of that series of lectures.
So that was decent roadwork
on that “Way of Holiness.”
Well, Storrs knew that he didn’t have
the whole truth on every subject.
And in 1847,
he made quite an interesting statement;
it would be interesting for us.
He says: “We . . . do well to remember
“that we have just emerged
from the dark ages of the church;
“and [notice this]
it would not be . . . strange
“if we should find some ‘Babylonish garments’
still worn by us.”
Well, he was right.
Babylon still had influence in those days.
Well, we know
that George Storrs had an influence
on Charles Taze Russell.
Now, what do we know
about Brother Russell and his associates?
They weren’t the first
to discover that the Trinity
and the immortality of the soul
are false doctrines,
or even that Christ’s presence
would be invisible to the human eye.
They benefited
from the careful preparatory work
that other road workers had done in the past.
So translators, printers,
and Bible students
were doing spiritual site work.
And we might say
that Brother Russell and his associates
put the final touches
on that “Way of Holiness.”
Well, Babylon the Great fell in 1919,
and then “the Way of Holiness”
was open for travelers.
But Brother Russell died in 1916.
Did he miss it?
Did he miss the inauguration of the road?
I don’t think so.
He didn’t have a bird’s-eye view
of the opening of the road;
he had a heaven’s-eye view,
because Brother Russell and his associates
who had finished their earthly course
were able to look down from the heavens.
And can you imagine how excited they were
when they saw the first travelers
set foot on “the Way of Holiness”?
It must have been
very exciting for them indeed.
And it wouldn’t be surprising
if Brother Russell and his associates
were firmly involved
in the maintenance program
of that “Way of Holiness” today,
because every good road
needs ongoing maintenance.
“The Way of Holiness” is open,
but maintenance
on that “Way of Holiness” goes on.
And what’s the goal?
It’s to make it as easy as possible
for people to identify Babylon the Great
and to leave Babylon the Great
—that is the goal.
Well, take the Bible, for example.
There were Bible translations in 1919,
but some of them were
in archaic language
that was hard to understand.
And most of them didn’t give the divine name
the place of honor that it deserved.
But now we have the New World Translation.
What a blessing that has proved to be!
It’s so clear, and you don’t have
to mortgage the house to buy a copy,
which was probably
the case in the 16th century.
And since 1919,
there has been an abundance of spiritual food
to make it easier
for people to come into the truth.
Now, just think of this:
In 1919, Babylon the Great fell.
But what else happened in 1919?
What provision did Jehovah
make for these people?
“The faithful and discreet slave”
was appointed in that same year.
And the slave didn’t waste any time
to start producing literature
that was going to make it easier
for people to come into the truth.
In 1919, the slave is appointed.
By 1921, you have a brand new publication,
The Harp of God.
And it was especially designed for beginners
and to make it easy for people to study
and read and come into the truth.
And that was necessary because in 1921
there was a shortage
of teachers, or publishers,
who could conduct Bible studies with people.
So you really needed something simple.
And comparatively speaking,
that Harp of God  was simple.
Now, there were very few publishers
in those days, just a few thousand.
But they were workers;
they did a tremendous job!
Do you realize that before The Harp of God
went out of print,
almost six million copies
in 22 languages had been circulated?
So this is evidence
that maintenance work
on “the Way of Holiness”
had begun right after the road opened.
Well, I doubt that very many in this audience
have come into the truth
through The Harp of God.
Anybody here?
I don’t think so.
What publication brought you into the truth?
What publication helped you
to identify “the Way of Holiness”?
Was it “The Truth Shall Make You Free,”
“Let God Be True,”
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life,
You Can Live Forever,
the Knowledge book, Enjoy Life Forever!,
Teach Us (What Can the Bible Teach Us? ),
or is it our fine,
new publication Enjoy Life Forever!?
All of these publications
have been used to help people
to break free from Babylon the Great.
And this is proof positive
that maintenance
on “the Way of Holiness” is ongoing.
This roadwork continues,
and it gets better and better.
Are you studying the Bible with someone
with the help of Enjoy Life Forever!?
If you are, you’re pointing
that person to “the Way of Holiness.”
So don’t be afraid to offer studies,
as Brother Sanderson mentioned,
to business associates, relatives,
schoolmates—anybody you can think of.
Offer Bible studies,
and you’ll be surprised
at who will take you up on it.
And as you do, keep in mind
that while the road
has been made easier for travelers,
setting foot on that road
takes courage and effort.
So let’s be ready to help
those who are willing to respond.
Millions have already taken that road,
and it’s our hope
that millions more will do so
before the end of this system of things.
And we wish them all safe travels.